In 1877, to celebrate the centennial anniversary of America’s independence from England, the French government presented the United States with a colossal statue that has came to be one of the most beloved symbols of America. The gift was presented in honor of the alliance between France and America during the Revolutionary War. The formal name of the figure is Liberty Enlightening the World, but it is almost universally known as the Statue of Liberty.
Since the French government donated the money for the project, French sculptor Frederic-Auguste Bartholdi and engineer Gustav Eiffel were put in charge of the design. The massive structure was assembled in Paris, where it was put on exhibition before being dismantled, then shipped to New York and finally reassembled on Liberty Island.
The statue is made of thin copper sheets, each just a tenth of an inch thick. They are riveted to an iron framework, which forms the shape of the statue. The statue itself is 151 feet tall, but it stands on top of a large pedestal made of concrete and granite, which was designed by American architect Richard Morris Hunt. The total height of the statue and the pedestal is 305 feet, visible from miles away. The statue holds a torch in one hand, which is meant to symbolize liberty. In the other hand, the figure clutches a book, upon which the date of America’s declaration of independence, July 4, 1776, is marked.
Due to the difficulty and expense of working on an isolated island, construction took nearly a decade. After the statue was completed in 1886, President Grover Cleveland came to New York to preside over the dedication ceremony. After the unveiling, the Statue of Liberty became a beacon of freedom for both newly arriving immigrants and longtime city dwellers. But after decades of exposure to pollution and harsh ocean air, time had taken its toll on Lady Liberty, as the statue is sometimes called. A full century after the dedication, a restoration effort was launched to repair damage from age and the elements. Funded by both the French and American governments, the renovation of the statue required enclosing it in a scaffold while workers renovated the copper sheeting and replaced the glass torch with a gold one.